{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang13322{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.10586}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang10 Autopilots\par
The Navigator ships with 2 interchangeable Auto pilots namely a modified version of the KAP140 and a more sophisticated IT_Autoflight Autopilot.\par
Starting with the KAP140 the following websites provide all the details you need to utilize "<fred>" to its fullest and also be aware of its short comings. Its highly recommended to be familiar with it prior to use as otherwise you might be in for some very nasty urprises.\par
prelim\par
taken from the original fg manual\par
Cruising with George\par
\par
After we have trimmed our Darling Cessna (at 3500ft, hdg. 346\'b0, speed ~120 kn at ~2500 RPM) we can try to relax a little and get our "Servant" to work - also known as "George" or "AP". See the chapter "AutoPilot" for a description of all his/it's abilities and how to handle it. On this flight we will just use him/it for keeping the heading (HDG) and altitude (ALT).\par
\par
As soon as we tell "George" to take over he will do so very eagerly - and sometimes you might be surprised how well (and blind and stupid)! This servant will follow your orders without any intelligence - he will even follow orders of which you have no idea that you gave them! So make sure what orders you may have given him before telling him to take control! George will immediately take over two controls:\par
\par
    ROL: George will use the ailerons to level the wings and keep them leveled immediately! He does not care at all about heading or course or whatever - he just keeps the wings leveled - and he will fight against you very strongly if you would dare to move the ailerons just a tiny bit -- the ailerons are now "Gorges" responsibility and he will fight for it - until you give him explicitly other orders! And giving "orders" is not just "Hey George I make a little turn", but\par
        make sure the Heading marker (the little red marker in your "Heading Indicator") is set to the heading you like (now 346\'b0)\par
        then you tell George to follow that heading defined by the "heading marker" by pushing the button "HDG"\par
        and then you can change that "heading marker" as you want - and George will follow that change immediately!\par
            A little Warning: George is stupidly trying to react as fast as possible. So if e.g. you are flying 360\'b0 and want to make a turn to 090\'b0 Gorge will do that very nicely - turning immediately to the right. But if e.g. on the right there is a big mountain (or ATC asked for "left"), then you may want to make that turn to the left - but George will never understand that: He will always try to turn the shortest way, and that is to the right (only 90\'b0 turn instead of 270\'b0 via left!). So you have to trick him by using 2 stages: Tell him first to turn to e.g. 200\'b0 and shortly before he is there tell him to turn to 090\'b0! The turn-order to George must always be smaller 180\'b0 if you do need a certain turn-direction!\par
\par
If you want to have a little fun: Try to tell George to turn left by moving the red marker counter-clockwise to 090\'b0 FAST - then George will immediately start turning to the left - but as soon as the angle between the current heading and the red-marker becomes larger then 180\'b0 he suddenly will reverse and turn into the other direction! That is how stupid he is - we are lucky to have an intelligent pilot watching George!\par
\par
    VS (Vertical Speed): George will continue to ascent/descend as is - so watch it if you give that control to George: If you do it while descending, George will continue to descend until you crash - or tell him otherwise!\par
        You may tell him what to do by using the "UP"/"DN" buttons. With those buttons you define the FPM (feet per minute) with which you want to ascent/descent!\par
        Normal values would be around 500 to 750!\par
\par
Caution: The AP uses the trimming functions to control. Thus those may be messed up pretty much and may even crash you when Taking Off again after an AP-Approach - and you forget to set trimming to "neutral" again! But also if you just switch off the AP during flight the trimmings may not be what you would expect when switching the AP back on again!\par
\par
Clever as you are, by now you probably get a wonderful idea: "I will just get the wheels off the ground, initiate a climb and then switch AP"! Well - hhhmmm - yes - it will work (most of the times!!) - but please: Do not! There are 3 big reasons for not doing it:\par
\par
    Safety: In case anything goes wrong during the TakeOff you will smash onto ground before being able to switch off the AP and take over again!\par
    Reliability: You should remember that you are controlling the ascent and heading with the Yoke (i.e. Elevator, Rudder, etc.) while the AP uses only the trimming-functions. So, if you have not trimmed to your actual attitude yet, the AP will have big problems and needs a lot of time finding the correct trimming! You always should trim first manually (at least roughly) before activating the AP! Or you are never sure what will happen! For sure it will not be a smooth transient, if you just let George take over - he really is dammed stupid (although he is a wonderful piece of clever engineering!)!\par
    Proficiency: After you have trimmed for cruise there is not much to "fly" for you any more. So you will forget what flying is all about - so use these TakeOff's to keep up your feelings, reflexes, etc. etc.\par
\par
You tell George to stop controlling by pushing AP a second time. And here is one of the problems: George will not stop immediately - he first will start flashing the display to warn you - and will withdraw only after some time! So do not expect immediate actions - if you are on AP you have to trust that "non intelligent" servant for some time! Be sure not to hit a sudden emergency! As soon as you believe it could become critical - you better take over control immediately! (Yes: In reality all Pilots do have an extra switch at there yoke to switch the AP off immediately - but not you!)\par
\par
If you restart the AP during the same session - it will restart with the values it had before! So be careful if you just mad a Touch&Go or took a rest at some airport in between. Switching on the AP will be OK for ROL and VS -- everything else you should double-check prior to activate it !\par
\par
So let George be our servant now: We switch him on by a click onto "AP"\par
\par
\tab After switching on "ROL" and "VS" will be active!\par
That means the wings will stay horizontally leveled and the actual ascent/descent will be continued!\par
\par
See the "0400" in the upper right corner: That means we were climbing with 400 ft when switching on. George will continue to get us up until we stall due to the engine stopped (because the Mixture was not adjusted by you) - or till we tell George to do something different!\par
\par
\tab By now we have clicked onto "HDG" and "ALT" - that means George will follow the red heading bug (wherever that points to) and keep the altitude we are at now.\par
\par
To change the present altitude we could push "ALT" (i.e. "VS" gets active again) and then we define with the "UP"/"DN" in what direction we ascent/descent and how fast. When crossing the wanted altitude, we push "ALT" again - so we stay there!\par
\tab This is a typical indication when we descent during approach: We sink with about 500 ft/Min and follow the direction the red heading bug points to.\par
\par
To level of at a certain altitude (e.g. Pattern = 1400 ft) hit "ALT" when crossing that.\par
To change the heading just move the red heading bug.\par
\par
\par
But even if you can trust George in general - keep monitoring him! Especially for:\par
\par
    Altitude and Speed and Fuel: George will not adjust speed, RPM, AoA, tanks, etc.\par
    Mixture: George does not care about the mixture at all. If you tell him to climb to 12,000 ft he will do his best - but you probably crash somewhere above 7000 ft because the engine stopped. (see Mixture)\par
    Landmarks/Waypoints: At best you set yourself a timer for when the next waypoint is to be expected!\par
\par
And do not forget: Enjoy that wonderful landscape below you!\par
\par
Autopilot\par
\par
(ref: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.n612sp.com }}{\fldrslt{http://www.n612sp.com\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 )\par
\par
The Autopilot (AP) shall support the pilot, especially on long-range flights, by taking over the controls based on predefined data. The AP can do standard procedures much better then a pilot - but it has a very limited understanding of the data it is using, and interprets those data without any intelligence! As an example: If you program the AP to climb to 10.000 ft it will do that perfectly - but at an altitude of about 7.000 ft you will crash! Remember from our first flights? The Mixture has to be adjusted - and the AP does not know that! There are thousands of such happenings!\par
\par
  So never forget: You are the Pilot in Command -- not the Autopilot!! \par
\par
    Switch off the Autopilot before any "TakeOffs" and "Landings"! Otherwise you are up for very funny surprises! Even when landing with AP-ILS: Do switch off prior to Touch-Down!\par
        Yes, I know: There are models that can do a complete landing (including speed and leveling off - the Concorde is a perfect example for it!) -- but that are only a few - and for sure not the Cessna!! \par
        When you switch off, switch off the whole device because it is very difficult to predict which functions will remain active or become active when you switch off only certain functions (e.g. the "ROL" will stay active, etc.)\par
        Remember the delay! The AP will never switch off at once - it always first blinks some time to warn you - and then switches Off after that! Try it and notice how long that takes!\par
\par
Let us see the functions behind all the controls from left to right:\par
\par
    AP (Autopilot) switches the AP-unit on/off.\par
        When you switch on the AP the very first time, it will read all the needed status-informations and controls at that time only. The following are typical values displayed in the upper line after the initial start:\par
            "ROL\ldblquote : The AP keeps the wings leveled\par
            "VS\ldblquote : The "vertical speed" continues active - e.g. the current climb or descent will continue\par
            "00000\ldblquote  the wanted cruise altitude is reset to 0 !!\par
                You should set the wanted altitude as soon as possible! Otherwise the AP will try to climb to the moon or descent to sea-level!!\par
                Change that soon - see "ARM" below\par
\par
        For cruising we will change the AP-settings to show that first line like in the picture above:\par
            HDG: The AP will hold the heading set in the Gyro-Compass\par
            ALT: The AP will hold the current altitude\par
            04000: The Altitude to be hold is 5000 ft\par
\par
         AP-Error-Indications: Above the AP-button there may show up 2 error-indicators as red letters:\par
            P: The AP cannot control the "Pitch" (elevator/trim) - the AP may switch off.\par
            R: The AP cannot control the "Rolling" (ailerons) - the AP may switch off\par
\par
    HDG (Heading) will switch the upper left indication between "ROL\ldblquote  and "HDG\ldblquote .\par
        "ROL" just keeps the wings leveled\par
        "HDG\ldblquote  will turn to and hold the heading defined by the "red bug" in the Gyro-Compass. When you move the bug the AP will immediately follow that new setting (even while in transfer!). And it will always take the shortest way to the new setting. That may result in a problem:\par
            let us assume you are flying a heading of 000\'b0 and ATC advises you to "turn left to 090\'b0"\par
            then you probably start turning the red bug to the left to go to the new heading - and the plane follows turning left\par
            BUT: You can turn the bug that fast, that there will occur a gap of more than 180\'b0 between the bug and the actual heading achieved\par
                that means: The plane suddenly turns the other way - because the initial turn is now greater 180\'b0 - thus the other one now is less than 180\'b0 - and thus shorter!\par
            so when turning more then 180\'b0 you must turn in steps smaller 180\'b0. e.g. in this case you first turn the bug left to 190\'b0 - and shortly before the actual heading reaches that 190\'b0continue to move the bug to the 090\'b0!!\par
\par
    NAV (Radio-Navigation) switches to follow the course set in "NAV1\ldblquote . The AP will then try to intercept the radial set in the OBS and follow it according to the CDI. You should be on an course fitting for an interception (<60\'b0 deviation to the radial) - otherwise you cannot be sure if the interception ends up in the "TO" or "FROM" direction! In any case verify the course after the interception!\par
\par
    APR (Approach) activates the ILS-Approach - i.e. the Glide-Slope will be activated too (if available).\par
        The newest version of the c172p does not require any more to wait till the GS-needle is horizontally prior to activating the GS!! \par
        But older version (prior 2.0) will need it - for other models you have to find out yourself (or be careful and just do not activate the GL too early)\par
\par
    REV (Reverse) switches to the reverse of the localizer radial. When you are on APR it will switch off the GL automatically!\par
\par
    ALT (Altitude) activates the altitude control\par
        if the actual altitude is different to the wanted ALT we will climb or sink as defined by the UP/DN! Did you notice the problem? The UP/DN is winning! So if you are at 2000 and set the wanted ALT to 4000 ft -- it depends on the UP/DN whether you climb or descent. If in this case UP/DN is set "-500 ft" you will descent from 2000 ft down do crash, because you never cross the wanted altitude of 4000 ft!\par
        clicks on "UP" or "DN" switch into the "VS" mode and increases or decreases the rate of climb/descent - see the following UP/DN.\par
        click on the ALT switches the indicated function from "VS\ldblquote  to "ALT" and back\par
\par
        PT-Indication:\par
            There may appear a blinking, vertical written "<PT>" indication between the displayed "ALT" and "4000" in the above picture. That is a suggestion to you to trim into the indicated direction. (Remember: The big trim-wheel on the center-console? Use the keys 7/1 or mouse-wheel over the trim, etc.). There will be no direct problems if you do not trim - except: As soon as you switch off the AP the airplane is not trimmed at all - you might be in for a surprise!\par
\par
    UP/DN (up/down) increase/decrease the rate of climb/descent (watch the negative sign in front of the number - that is often overlooked!)\par
\par
        As said before: These settings take precedence over the ALT setting - so there are some very remarkable actions possible\par
\par
        actual (cursing)\par
        altitude\par
        \tab actual "preset"\par
        altitude\par
        \tab set UP/DN\par
        \tab Action\par
        3000\par
        \tab 4000\par
        \tab (+) 500\par
        \tab we will climb to 4000 ft with a rate of 500 fpm\par
        3000\par
        \tab 4000\par
        \tab -500\par
        \tab we will descent to crash with a rate of -500 fpm\par
\par
        3000\par
\par
        \tab 2000\par
        \tab (+) 500\par
        \tab we will climb until crash with 500 fpm  (or land on the moon)\par
        3000\par
        \tab 2000\par
        \tab -500 \tab we will descent to 2000 ft with -500 fpm\par
        3000\par
        \tab 3000\par
        \tab (+) 500 then -500\par
        \tab "jump" over an obstacle and then return to the set altitude\par
\par
    ARM activates the dial below it to preselect the wanted (cruising) altitude. Use the mouse-wheel or push the left mouse-button to change by 10 ft each, or the center button (or wheel) for changes in 100 ft each.\par
\par
    BARO activates the dial below it to define the barometric pressure.\par
        NOTICE: That "barometric pressure" for the AP is independent of the barometric pressure set (usually) by the knob at the altimeter!!!\par
\par
Once more 2 points:\par
\par
    A blinking display does not indicate an error - it is just the warning you that a new function has been selected and will be activated soon!\par
    Especially when switching off the AP it may take some time before you get back full control. The active settings will be saved for that session!\par
\par
\par
We now will stay some time above the clouds and\par
should take a time-out to recover from this "wonderful scary experiences"\par
and take some time to prepare for the approach to KLVK\par
thus we ALL will involve George now:\par
\par
    If not done yet start the AP by pushing in the AP-button\par
    Verify that the NAV-1 is set to "SJC FROM 009\'b0" (frequency is 114.1 and the OBS is set to 009\'b0)\par
    Verify that you fly the NAV-1 CDI  close to centered\par
    Push the "NAV" button - that tells George to keep the NAV-1 CDI centered\par
    Push "ARM" and rotate the big wheels below it to set a wanted altitude of 5000 ft\par
    Then use the UP/DN buttons to achieve that altitude.\par
\par
\par
\par
\tab Let\rquote s look a bit more closely at the autopilot display (and forgive me that the picture shows 4000 instead of 5000):\par
\par
    HDG: The actual mode of holding the direction is the "red bug" in the Gyro-Compass\par
    NAVARMed: The AP is in transient from HDG to NAV mode, i.e. it will start to follow the CDI of the NAV-1 soon\par
    ALT/ALTARMed: Those 2 "ALT" over each other define that we are leveled at the preset (ARMed) altitude of 4000 ft. Those 2 "ALT" could be replaced by other values, like:\par
        VS/ALT: Would mean the AP is changing to the predefined altitude, with the FPM defined by  the UP/DN settings\par
        VS/(blank): Would mean the AP is just going UP/DN (without a predefined altitude to achieve!)\par
        a flashing "vPT" or "^pt" to the left of "ALT" would suggest to trim the AoA. If you do not follow that suggestion, you might experience some surprise, when later on George returns a badly balanced aircraft back to you!!\par
\par
Don\rquote t forget that the autopilot won\rquote t adjust the throttle, so when you change from/to UP/DN/cruise, the airplane (and engine) will change speed. You\rquote ll need to adjust the throttle to keep a proper cruise speed.\par
\par
}
 